Meeting minutes for IETF106 inofficial side meeting 'New IP Research'
  See: https://trac.ietf.org/trac/ietf/meeting/wiki/106sidemeetings

Time: Wednesday 11/20/2019, 8:30 AM, Room: Orchard

Contact:
   Richard Li, richard.li@futurewei.com

Note taker:
   Toerless Eckert (Futurewei), tte@cs.fau.de

Meeting Description:
   Discussion on New IP Architecture and Protocols for Future Networks

More Information:
   ITU-T Network 2030 has been studying futuristic applications such as
   holographic type communications and industrial machine-to-machine
   control/communications, and infrastructural evolution such as satellite
   networks and industrial IoT. Among a few others, we would like to (1)
   explore the impacts of futuristic applications to the IP architecture
   and protocols, and (2) investigate the implications of infrastructural
   evolution for the IP architecture and protocols.

----
Attendees:
   88 attendees according to attached attendee list.

----
Introduction:
   See 00-IETF106_side-meeting-intro.pptx

----
Presentation 1:
   See 01-High_Precision_Network_v3.pdf
   Liang Geng - High Precision Communications  - gengliang@chinamobile.com

Q&A:

Greg Mirsky: telemtry (passive) will not replace active probing. Active needed for
 installation, where no real traffic exists yet. Both tools need to be in the box.
 ... Ok, what is open

Stewart Bryant: we talk about dynamic applications and dynamic instrumentation
 no solutions fr this yet. Predominant static tooling to

Q china mobile: First priority inband OAM Very hard to do end-to-end
in IP networks. Better support in prior transport networks.

Yong Cui Tsinghua university: Have you thought about degree of precision ?
Yes, very good question, need to work on answers.

----
Presentation 2:
   See 02-IETF106-side-meeting-soip.pdf
   Service Oriented Internet Protocol, Brian Carpenter

Q&A:

Nicollas Hart, Lancaster University: Deja Vu, walled gardens, probably more to it,
but good history remember and learn from it. Applicable question also who pays for
what servce.

Jim Guichard, Futurewei: Challenge: What is definition of service, means so many
different things to so many different people

David Black, Dell: Mentioned draft, what is the name ?
A: draft-jiang-service-oriented-ip

? china mobile: The service from differnt point of view is for operators for example
VPN, for individual user more like an application. Not clear what the context in the
presentation is (operator, user)

Aaeron Falk, Akamai:  Dispatcher shown to be in network, could this not also
happen in the end-system ?
A: Propose to happen as a separate box, so that end-system does not have to be changed ?
Q: If you rotate it 90 degrees, it looks a lot like Taps

--------
Presentation 3:
    See  03-IETF 106-side-meeting - ISTN.pdf
    Research on Evolutional Integrated Satellite-Terrestrial Network
    Hewi Li Tsinghua University

No questions.

--------
Presentation 4:

   Richard Li, Futurewei, Network 2030, ITU-T focus group.

Q&A:

Jim Reid RTFM LLP: 
Q1: will slides /meetings be published ?

A: yes,
Q2: Output of ITU-T work in future ?

A: working through end september 2020, then planning to proceed work in WG13 in ITU-T
Q3: How would IRTF work interact with ITU-T work ?

A: Three sub-teams currently in ITU-T: use-cases, services, architecture.
   Not talking about solutions! Would like to see IRTF group to first review
   output from ITU and voice opinion if it makes sense (ITU-T -> IRTF)

Adrian Farrel, ISE: Thank you for putting this together. Lot of incentive likely of
engineers in the room how to bend existing protocols to make them work in future, but
we do not have a good understanding of future applications because we do not understand
those future applications well. Little coordination of all the future research going on.

A: Yes, think there are many open problems. At IP layer, layer 2, non IP layers,
but far from protocol standardization, can not predict. Many verticals,
cloud-driving, machine communications.

Sheng Jiang: Already following network 2030 meetings. Some of those problem spaces can
result in short term solutions, some of them give pause to rethink the fundamentals
of IP network from the last 30 years. Talking about research group: what we first want
though is to remember is that we may want to separately identify short and long-term
issues, put short term into IETF, long-term into IRTF.

Liang Geng China Mobile: IRTF open meeting had discussion about role of IRTF and how
to coordinate with IETF. IRTF should serve to do the research work that can ultimately
address IETF. But not a pure academic community. Eg.: Tsinghua proposal is something
 that could practically be implemented / standardized by IETF.

Aaron Falk: Was IRTF chair for a while, chartered many groups, not all successful. Thinks
presentation is nice description of problem. Benefit of IRTF RG is gives opportunity
to collaboration with IETF community not present otherwise in research communities.
This works best when there is a well-defined problem, can be hard/big but needs to be
well defined. Marketing issuue: how do i know i want to participate. Picture painted
by presentation covers many problems. Scope described today is not a good match for
a single activity, can have a mailing list, but would not have a lot of discussions.
See a bunch of activities that could come out of this where people disagree on individual
topics whcih could then spawn individual efforts. Maybe what to do, change thinking:
Could create a stream of IRTF groups / topics, each with a little more focus.
Also seen success of researchers with different funding sources / interests come
together, e.g.: EU programs. They showed up, but no collaboration with IETF. Should not
hae been set up in IRTF because they did not collaborate. Hopefully helpfull context.

A: Thank you, short feedback: we are meeting with different research bodies that are already
geting funding to look into long-term research and asked them to collaborate across boundaries
of their own funding scope. IRTF would be a good body for such cross-funding source
collaboration. The Internet is so successful (services, content, sharing).

Colin Perkins IRTF chair:  Aaron said most of what i wanted to say. I can imagine
some parts of this to fit scope of existing or new IRTF groups, some fitting into
IETF and parts fitting neither IEF WG, IRTF RG. Neither of these sets of groups have
been good at large-scale efforts

Wes Hardaker, USC/ISI: Past has shown challenges when in parallel IRTF/IETF and ITU-T
work at same time on same issues. Results in a lot of even more complex interactions.
Review is hard to do when e.g.: ITU-T results have not been finished.

Raise of hands: ca. 80% of attendendants indicated they would like to continue this effort
[25 attendees put mail address onto blue sheet to join a mailing list].
